hundred and forty two thousand eight
hundred and seventy three
people have been vaccinated across the
united kingdom and
eighteen million nine hundred and eleven
thousand
nine hundred and seventy eight doses
have been given overall
since yesterday 9938 people
are reported to have tested positive for
coronavirus
as of the 22nd of february 2021 sixteen
thousand
eight hundred and three people were in
hospital with coronavirus
that's down twenty percent from the week
before
and sadly of those who have tested
positive for coronavirus
across all settings 121
747 are reported to have now died
that's an increase of 442 fatalities
since
yesterday and our thoughts
are very much with the families of those
who have lost
loved ones to this virus
on monday the prime minister outlined
the road map
out of lockdown and gave us the news
that we've all been waiting for
we can now plan for the return of all
pupils to schools and colleges
as part of a roadmap for leaving
lockdown
i want to say once again a massive thank
you to our incredible teachers
leaders support staff and child care
workers
you have been going above and beyond
to keep schools and colleges open for
vulnerable children and children of
critical workers
and to keep the remainder of young
people learning
when they're at home i also want to
thank
parents who've been supporting their
children while they learn at
home and i want to thank children and
young people themselves for their
patience and resilience
i know it hasn't been easy but you have
adapted and done
so much to make sure that you've been
able to continue to learn
everyone everyone is longing
for a return to normality and i want you
to know that
we're continuing to support schools
colleges and teachers with extra help
to boost children's learning we're
investing in a range of options that
parents and children will benefit from
whether that's summer schools extra
funding for specialist teaching and
expanding our national tutoring
program as the prime minister said
we can now take the next steps
these will be cautious but that's
crucial
if we don't want to end up going
backwards
so the process we've planned will be
carefully managed at every stage
i'm incredibly pleased that the latest
data
tells us that we are able to proceed
with a full return of schools and
colleges from monday the 8th of march
as we outlined earlier this week primary
school pupils return to school on that
day
while secondary schools and colleges
will be able to stagger their return
over that week to ensure all their
students can be offered
covered tests wrap around child
care for primary and secondary school
pupils will also resume from the 8th of
march
university students who are studying
practical courses
who need specialist facilities can also
return to campus
from then on too we'll review the timing
for return of the remaining students by
the end of easter holidays
despite everyone's best efforts many
children
are going to need longer term support if
they're to make the educa
educational progress that they need
this is why the prime minister and
myself appointed our education recovery
commissioner sir kevin collins
to advise on how our early year settings
as well as our schools and colleges
can address these learning gaps as
quickly and as comprehensively as
possible
but because young people just cannot
afford to wait
we're putting in place a range of
immediate measures for schools to start
now
to recover lost learning today we're
announcing the introduction of a new
one-off 302
million pound recovery premium for state
primary
and secondary schools building on the
pupil premium
to further support pupils who need it
most
we're expanding our successful tutoring
programs 200 million
pounds will fund an extended national
tutoring programme for primary and
secondary schools
an extension to the 16 to 19 tuition
fund
to support more students in english
maths and other vocational
and academic subjects and funding to
support language
development in early years children
finally 200 million pounds will be
available
for secondary schools to deliver
face-to-face summer schools
schools will be able to target
individual pupils needs
this means this if your child needs
extra help
then they will able to get it for
example
a block of tutoring can help a child
gain
to five months of catch up in learning
we know our teachers are best placed to
understand what your children will need
so they'll have the tools to deliver
that
extra boost and make a real difference
as we recover from this pandemic
the package announced today will build
on the one billion pound catch-up
package we announced last june
and forms part of a wide response to
help pupils make up for
the lost learning they've suffered
this isn't just about more money for
schools
this is investing in our children this
boost to learning
will be assessed and evidence-based and
will track the outcomes
the scientific advice does support a
full return for schools on the 8th of
march
as professor chris witte said on monday
the risk to children is incredibly low
from going to school
and from catching covid so everything is
strongly in favor
of children going to school
we are supporting this return with a
robust
testing regime they'll be critical in
breaking the
chains of covid infection
four million tests have already been
completed across primary secondary
schools
and colleges staff have
worked hard to set up testing sites in
schools
and have had time to get used to
supervising for testing
we're now expanding asymptomatic testing
further
and have published full details online
in line with public health guidance
we're also now advising that face
coverings should be worn in secondary
school classrooms
as well as in further and higher
education settings
unless social distancing can be
maintained
again this is to help reduce
transmission
the risk to children themselves is
incredibly low
this is a temporary measure to support
the safe return of schools
and will be in place until easter when
it's reviewed
all the other safety measures that are
already in place continue to be robust
including bubble groups staggered starts
and staggered finishes
increasing ventilation and strict
hygiene measures
return to school is what we have been
looking forward to
it is time for children to be back in
school learning and playing with their
friends
but we must also look to the future no
child should have their prospects
blighted by the pandemic and i'm
determined that this
isn't going to happen tomorrow we'll be
setting out for details on how grades
will be
awarded this summer while i cannot
preempt that announcement
i'm very pleased to say that it will
confirm that this year
we're putting our trust firmly in the
hands of teachers
the broad range of catch-up measures we
have planned will enable children to
start recouping
not just for lost learning time but the
fun
and friendship that they have missed out
so much on
they quite simply deserve no less
i think our whole nation has never
before
valued what schools and teachers and
education bring to all of our children
more than it does today
and i think we'll all be so much willing
for the successful return of all our
children back into school
on the 8th of march
now we're going to have the opportunity
to turn to
mark from yorkshire who's got the first
question
hello if decisions are driven by the
data and the data is better than
expected
will the road map out of lockdown be
accelerated thank you
well as the prime minister said that
there are no plans whatsoever to
be moving ahead of the dates that have
already been given
we want to give public as well as
business
the confidence and the assurance as to
when these next steps are going to be
happening
but there are certainly no plans to be
moving ahead of that
jenny i'm not sure if there's anything
you wanted to add probably just to
reinforce the fact that the
the timelines have been set for very
good public health reasons we need to be
able to see
uh the change in the infection rates the
development of illness the effect of the
vaccine and the effect on
hospitalizations in the nhs
and all of that takes a time and it
usually takes a week or 10 days or so
for a particular intervention to embed
so one of the positive things from my
perspective from the school
starting back is we have a a really good
clear window now to see
uh to make sure uh that what we expect
to happen does actually happen and then
review so i think
certainly we we will be looking to keep
those timelines as much as we can
and next we turn to lauren from
tonbridge
hello with the new roadmap for reopening
the country it was mentioned that all
legal limits on social contact will be
removed by the 21st of june at the
earliest does this include the use of
mass
and ppe indoors if not how long do you
think this rule will apply
jenny if i can turn to you um so i think
i go back to the the points that we've
just made about being really clear
about the impact that different
interventions have and these lifting of
measures as we go forward
one of the things we know of course is
that doing things outside is ever so
much
safer than doing things inside
ventilation we know is really important
uh
and uh fresh air is uh uh
always uh reduces if you like the
density of the virus
so outdoors is not so much of an issue
and you'll see that coming through
in the the guidance and the road map um
i think we have to look at these
different interventions
and look at the data as the roadmap says
and check where we are
and i think as i think sir patrick said
earlier this week that as we get into
the autumn
when winter comes in and we spend more
time inside then again we may be looking
at it but it's quite possible
over summer months as we did last year
when we see rates drop
uh that we would not need to be wearing
uh
masks all that time and obviously ppe
uh ppe uh ppe actually is is very much
for
um clinical use uh face coverings
uh clearly is for general use so i think
summer period
is generally we think is a much safer
period for us
with less need for interventions but i
think that doesn't rule it out as we go
into winter periods again and and as the
secretary of state has said and the
roadmap sets out
we have to stick very much to looking at
the evidence and then acting on that as
we go forward
next we turn to branwyn jeffries from
the bbc
branwyn education secretary you've
provided
short-term cash today but when will you
have
a long-term plan to help children
recover
and you've said just now that if your
child
needs help they will get it is that a
promise
that parents can hold you to
so branwyn what we all want to see is we
want to see all
of our children back into schools we
know that schools are the very best
place for
all of our children and as part of this
million pound package that we are
rolling out building on the billion
pounds that we announced last year
we're giving schools the tools that they
need in order to be able to deliver
for all children uh in that schools
um but it is it is a real sense and a
real belief that we can help
all children within the education system
this is why we've taken such a broad
range of measures
but given schools for flexibility in
order to be able to
sort of make sure that it's properly
targeted to the children who need the
most help
and in terms of when uh further details
about the
more mid-term and long-term reforms that
we'll be seeing
as you'll be well aware we just uh
pointed to
kevin collins uh just a couple of weeks
ago uh we want to give kevin a little
bit of opportunity and we're already
doing
an extensive amount of work in terms of
engaging with schools
teachers parents and children themselves
in terms of
looking at what are the next steps to
best be able to boost their education
and actually come out of this pandemic
stronger
bolder being able to deliver a better
and stronger education system for every
single one of our children
branwyn do you have another question
just to follow up on that point you seem
to be promising every parent that if
their child needs help
they will get it is that a promise they
can hold you too
well schools have always delivered for
all children right across the country
and the reason that we've given
such a broad range of tools for schools
to be able to
bring to bear to help children whether
it is for summer schools
whether it's for targeted tuition or
whether it's for flexibility with the
extra 302 million
pounds that will be going into school
budget to be able to craft that to the
specific needs
we'd hoped that that would be able to
meet the needs of all children
whatever their background in terms of
being able to help them catch up so yes
we're very much supporting all children
in our whole school system
next if we move to dan hewitt at
itv dan thank you education secretary
and two questions
um i'm happy if you answer them yes or
no if you want
um are school days going to be extended
to help up with the catch-up programme
and are summer holidays or could some
holidays be cut short this summer
to help children catch up so on um
on summer holidays what we've done in
terms of a 200 million pound program is
we're wanting schools to be putting on
great activities whether it's educat
education led or
even sort of well-being led so we'd be
hoping that schools can be
offering that draw down that funding in
order to be offering that to children
children so yes we would hope that
schools are offering
time in schools for children
and that's why we've put for funding
there in terms of
you ask about lengthening for school
days as part of
this plan it's not a part of a plan in
terms of lengthening school days
but as i've touched on in the past what
we're wanting to do is
wanting to see a real change a step
change in what we can deliver in terms
of our schools
that's why we're taking this in-depth
look at
how do we drive results how do we drive
attainment how do we drive the
the chances of youngsters from the most
disadvantaged backgrounds
and that's why we've asked kevin to do
this extensive
look uh at education and what reforms
what changes we can bring about
uh dan i'm not sure if there's a
follow-up question
yeah well you mentioned exams earlier so
ask about that can we
assume then that it's going to be full
teacher assessment on exam results this
year no
no algorithms and how will the appeal
process work in that case
uh well as i've said many times before
we're putting our trust in teachers
that's wherever trust is going there's
going to be no algorithms whatsoever
but there'll be a very clear and robust
appeals mechanism
but i'm afraid you're going to have to
forgive me it's right that this is
announced of a house of commons
and uh not to yourself um so sorry about
that dan but that will be happening
tomorrow so
just a few more hours to wait um
next if we can turn to ben at uh lbc
ben thank you secretary of state no
doubt at all that children have missed
out on a huge amount of school but
they've also missed on out
on a huge amount of other elements of
normal life so secretary said
can you reassure them today and
guarantee that the government will
not allow a situation this summer
whereby children
young people others who may have not
been vaccinated yet
will be prevented from going to the
cinema going out for a meal going on
holiday
with their family and if i could ask dr
harris there's some
evidence that the so-called kent variant
infects people for longer than the
original strain 13 days for the kent
variant one study found
compared to eight for the original
covert strain
they say the authors of that study that
means that the 10-day quarantine period
may need to be lengthened
is that something you're looking at and
if that did happen
is it your view that more would need to
be done to support people financially
to quarantine when they need to do so
thank you
jenny would you like to go for this
thank you for that so yes um obviously
we look at the different variants uh
regularly we have variants of interest
and variance under of concern uh those
are being monitored
you'll be aware that the uk has probably
the best genomics
functionality uh in the world and we're
contributing actually to world science
on that so absolutely watched all the
time
um it different studies will come out
with slightly different
uh periods and what you will have seen
with the original
if you like the original um coronavirus
in the uk is that we
managed the length of time for
quarantine to minimise the inconvenience
to individuals but still
reduce the risk of onward infection and
so yes we are looking at this but i
think we need to be really careful just
because as with the original
coronavirus you can still the time that
you detect the virus doesn't mean
necessarily that that is the infectious
period
it may be different in others and of
course at the moment we are
vaccinating really brilliantly across
the country
and so we have quite a different mix at
the moment of
transmission risks who may be at risk so
we're just starting to see early signs
that
those most vulnerable will have less
chance of serious
disease and and we will have to adapt
that as we go through but
actually every variant will be looked at
if it is a significant
of transmission risk across the uk and
ben
picking up on the question that you
asked me i think
as a a dad myself with uh
two daughters i i think uh that the
novelty of going for walks with me
is starting to run a bit thin now and
they want sort of a
slightly more enhanced entertainment so
i i think from
as a dad's point of view i'm very
desperate to make sure that they're able
to
enjoy the benefits of opening up
society opening up different parts of
the economy
and been able to get out there so i'm
absolutely sure
we're not going to be disadvantaging our
young people to be able to
enjoy the benefits of stepping out into
the world so much more than they've been
able to
ben i'm not sure if you've got another
question uh
please don't feel obliged if you have if
you haven't
there was just a quick thing i'm
relating to what you said earlier today
obviously you're leaving the summer
schools question to individual schools
how are you going to make sure that the
inequalities in education that we've
seen
worse than in this period don't worsen
still
by lack of central coordination over
that catch-up program
well we we're really sort of driving the
sort of tempo
giving the schools resources our
regional schools commissioners will be
working very closely with local
authorities
multi academy trusts and individual
schools themselves in order to be able
to ensure that we have this
level uh and you know schools are
meeting our expectations in terms of
spending this money
on interventions that are really going
to help
children and it's something that's
already ofsted
started to be able to look at and assess
and actually giving
schools guidance as to how best to be
able to
to go forward with this investment that
we're making in them and of course the
brilliant work of the education
endowment foundation
giving very clear guidance about how
best we can help
but this is part of a reason why we did
the national tutoring program
as well ben because there's so much
evidence based around the fact that
it really does drive attainment with
children
almost more than any other single
intervention and this is
a resource that's available to all
schools around the country
we want to see them making use of it
it's going to be truly transformational
for the lives of hundreds of thousands
um next if we can move to camilla
turner from the telegraph camilla thank
you
and to our education secretary um
william hague said that the impact of
covert on children will leave the
biggest scar
of the pandemic and require a revolution
in teaching
but how revolutionary are you prepared
to be would you consider things like
smaller class sizes
building more schools and longer terms
and secondly
do you believe the covert generation's
life chances are as good as those from
other generations
and to the deputy chief medical officer
much has been said about the damage to
children's education
but what assessment has been made of the
damage to their wider development by not
being able to play with their friends
or see their grandparents so
camilla if i i take the two questions
that you sort of posed me and then hand
over
to jenny we do need to see
we always need to have children at the
heart of everything that we do
every intervention every change that we
make to our schooling system has got to
be focused on one thing
and that's driving change and
improvement in terms of the outcomes
that children are going to have
and that's what we've uh tasks are kevin
to do
and there's a number uh of areas that
we need to be looking at and it is for
you know uh
one of those is making sure that we're
always driving up the
quality of teaching making sure that
children are getting the very best
uh teaching in the classroom also uh
the second item is looking at the time
that children are spent actually
learning
having the benefit of being able to pick
up knowledge and the third element is
making sure that we're targeting
uh children in the best possible way
making sure that those children that
need those interventions
that we're delivering on that it would
be wrong of me to try and preempt what
sir kevin is going to come forward with
but there is
a real appetite and a desire to make
sure we deliver the
absolute most for every single one of
our children
but that's going to be based on evidence
of what works
and what works is going to be what
drives us
in terms of reforms and changes that we
need to deliver
for all our changes and i coming on to
your second point about
the life chances of this covid uh you
know children who have been at school
during this period of um this coveted
pandemic
now as someone who has two daughters at
school
i'm absolutely certain that we are going
to do
everything we can do for all of our
children to make sure that they do not
uh they're not set back by this pandemic
that their life chances are in
any way not stinted we're going to do
everything we can do to make sure that
they can reach our absolute potential
this is why we're willing to look at
every single matter in order to be able
to drive their attainment
into the future and we are not going to
be timid
in terms of you know our aspirations for
them
and the actions that we'll have to take
to deliver for them
um jenny if thank you section of state
um yes
so i think in the same way that
face-to-face education we know that
missing that
uh has really significant negative
impacts on uh children's cognitive
emotional
uh academic well-being and on their
physical and mental health and i think
it's not although we naturally think of
grandparents there are many families
with entirely different makeups where
there are significant other individuals
who children attach to and learn from
and are really important in their lives
that they haven't been able to see
um sage so the scientific advisory group
on emergencies has looked at
particularly the face-to-face
um children's education risks around
that but generally as well about
children's well-being
and we know that mental health has
deteriorated for many children it was
rates of referrals for
children's mental health had increased
anyway in recent years but certainly
it has increased again during the
pandemic which of course is why it's so
important that children do go back to
school
the only caveat i would just say at the
moment around um
you know wanting to go and see your
grandparents which is absolutely natural
uh is uh two things one the testing
program
in schools is clearly going to mean that
people
parents grandparents and teachers and
other school children can be very
assured that schools will be as safe as
they can
because we are trying to remove
infection from that environment and of
course that will have a really positive
impact
on breaking change of transmission in
communities and in those families
but the slight caveat to that is having
got so far down
the line with this and now on the road
map very very carefully coming out
i would encourage children not to go off
yet even if their grandparents have had
their vaccinations
not to go hugging them too much until
we're absolutely sure
what the impact of that vaccine rollout
has been i'm sure it's going to be
positive but we just need to
take a steady course out through the
roadmap camila i know you managed to get
three questions into your first question
but i wasn't sure if you just got
one very one uh very short one
uh uh to sort of follow up um
yeah so if we we know that children's
education has been massively disrupted
and also their mental health has um
taken a huge hit in the past year um to
the education secretary
do you acknowledge that the government's
policies over the past year have played
a role in this deterioration
of children's mental health conditions
as well as their academic learning loss
well what the government has done is one
of uh you know we've got one of the most
impressive vaccine roles
out of any major industrial country
anywhere in the world
by taking the the big decisions that the
prime minister had to take
early last year when many people were
saying they weren't necessary this has
actually created a very clear pathway
as how we rebound out of this and of
course
as you all know camilla i always want to
see children in schools
all the time because you know i see the
values that they get i see the pleasure
that they get
but we know that there are there have
been
um you know children not being in school
uh is something that we never want to
see and obviously children
um do lose out as a result of that and
that's why we've got
you know a 700 million pound package
today
in terms of rolling out to schools to
support them
and we're looking at uh very much
solutions that support a child and help
a child
really succeed in the future and that's
the work that we're currently
undertaking and we're certainly going to
deliver on
um next if i can go to will
hazel at vi well
uh my first question is on the twice
weekly home cover testing
uh which secondary school people how are
you actually going to make sure
that they do that and would you like to
take this opportunity
for uh to ask parents uh
to check uh that they're doing that each
week and then secondly
um on summer schools um who's actually
gonna start these
uh classes um over the holidays and
would you like
to see teachers actually take some time
out of their holidays to help run those
well on the second point in terms of
summer schools the reason that we've
given schools the
additional resource is that they're then
in a position to be able to
uh pay existing staff bring new staff in
uh be able to properly uh resource these
schools and give a sort of
high quality um support for
for children that come in there so it's
really about the flexibility of
what works for the school but most
importantly what will be working best
for the children within that school
if that school decides to draw down on
that funding
and in terms of a twice weekly testing
yes i very much would hope that
parents would be there to support for
children in doing this
we're seeing over the first two weeks of
schools return
we'll be seeing in that first two weeks
children
doing the tests but being supervised
as part of that so they properly learned
the process
about how to do it and but that's
you know following on from that that
twice weekly testing regime
i certainly hope that parents will be
encouraging and supporting
children in doing that but we're also
asking
schools to keep open a asymptomatic
testing center
so if children haven't been able to get
the support or the help that maybe they
need
to do the test at home is possible to do
the test
in school as well i'm not sure if
anything on testing
and just to add to that i think the the
way that nhs test and tracer set this up
it is important that those tests are
reported back
um and for 18 year olds and above uh
that's obviously
an independent um uh process for 12 to
17 year olds as the secretary of state
has said then
uh that is an adult overseen process but
i think it's really
important people understand these are
very very simple things to do many of
the public are doing this now if they
perhaps go into work or
if they're a healthcare worker and in
fact what's being
set up for schools and for staff in
schools it's very similar to what
happens for
healthcare workers so i think staff can
be particularly assured
that that same sort of testing spacing
and approach
is there for them and for their pupils
so i think inherently uh
safer environments and schools as we go
forward with with this additional
uh testing mechanism and and will to add
we've obviously seen
uh testing rolled out since january
across
education settings it's been taken up uh
with enormous enthusiasm
uh we've also seen the role out of home
testing in terms of workforce
and the reporting back on this has been
incredibly positive with
uh you know one of the highest rates of
return
of any workplace setting uh being
within schools so uh via all the initial
indications are
uh it's been an enthusiastic embracing
of uh self-testing and we look forward
to seeing that expanded further
will i'm not sure if you've got a a
quick follow-up question or if there's
anything else
just just the quick i may um it's
for uh secondary school pupils to wear a
classroom
um in august boris johnson's children
wearing masks
in classes was nonsensical and that you
can't expect to learn with face
coverings
i'm just wondering uh if you agree with
them so
we've always said well all the way
through this is that we'll always follow
the best scientific
medical and health advice and when we
have that uh advice come forward uh
that's obviously
uh quite rightly for the advice that we
follow uh
jenny i'm not sure if there's anything
you want to say on for wearing a face
i will actually because i think earlier
on in the
broadcast when i was talking to lauren i
was speaking very general terms and
obviously this is very
about face coverings and their use so i
think we need to be very clear about
face
masks and ppe which is for clinical use
obviously face coverings are there to
help others we're protecting others
by wearing them and there are a number
of different conditions at the moment so
for example we have
a new variant and while we are
understanding that more um
then obviously taking additional
precautions uh makes sense we understand
more about the um ability for aerosol
generation and transmission so that is
also important
so things i think have moved on and it
should be reassuring to know that we
look at the evidence and then
adjust our advice accordingly but i
think also one of the
uh things here if if testing is coming
into place in schools
and we we will see but it's very likely
that we will find a few cases and there
will be
some children do have to stay at home
unfortunately for a short period at the
start of term
but then over time uh what will happen
is those
school environments should be free more
or less free of infection
um and at that point as the secretary of
state has said previously
around easter time then obviously that
is another issue to consider
it is important many children can't
communicate well
particularly small children which is why
this hasn't been
suggested for primary schools and and
really important to understand that any
child or any
uh adult or or other people helping them
who who needs to be able to be seen
to communicate effectively uh then there
are exemptions for this just as there
are
for our general uh use of face coverings
in public
thank you well next and finally we move
on to
amy gibbons from the times educational
supplement
thank you education secretary are you
worried that teachers faith in your
department has plummeted to the point
where 96 lack trust in your handling of
the pandemic
well amy thanks ever so much for uh
coming
uh to ask a question what we're focused
on is making sure that all children are
back into school
at the the right time and the best
possible moment that's going to be the
8th of march
we know that children benefit uh most of
all from being in school
we know that uh children need to be in
school in terms of not just their
education but their mental health and
their
their their development and that is why
our focus is making sure that they are
back in school
on the 8th of march and it's something
that i know so many teachers
are also very keen to see because they
want to be welcoming their children as
well
well i'd like to take the opportunity to
say thank you everyone for tuning in
and thank you for all you're doing to
make sure everyone
in the nation is safe thank you